feat(self-managed): aws opensearch doc (#4406)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/setup/deploy/amazon/amazon-eks/eks-helm.md

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

This guide provides a comprehensive walkthrough for installing the Camunda 8 Helm chart on your existing AWS Kubernetes EKS cluster. It also includes instructions for setting up optional DNS configurations and other optional AWS-managed services, such as OpenSearch and PostgreSQL.

Lastly you'll verify that the connection to your Self-Managed Camunda 8 environment is working.

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: This can likely just be removed given there isn't any content, and the headers can be reduced by one #.

Verify the configuration of your environment variables by running the following loop:

<Tabs groupId="env" defaultValue="standard" queryString values={
[
{label: 'Standard authentication', value: 'standard' },
{label: 'IRSA authentication', value: 'irsa' },
]}>

<TabItem value="standard">

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/main/examples/camunda-8.7/procedure/check-env-variables.sh
```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="irsa" label="IRSA" default>
  
When using IRSA authentication, specific environment variables need to be set with valid values.
</TabItem>

Once you have set the environment variables, you can verify that they are correctly configured by running the following loop:
<TabItem value="irsa">

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/main/examples/camunda-8.7-irsa/procedure/check-env-variables.sh
```

  </TabItem>
</TabItem>

</Tabs>

You can follow the guide from either [eksctl](./eks-helm.md) or [Terraform](./terraform-setup.md#export-values-for-the-helm-chart) to set it correctly.
### Export domain values

<Tabs groupId="domain">

>   <TabItem value="with" label="With Domain" default>

Reviewer 2: I'd prefer to cut down on the use of tabs when it splits up/hides/makes information less accessible. this section is still here, but as a note with a link, and not another tab.

>   <TabItem value="with" label="With Domain" default>

Reviewer 2: 👍 This absolutely works for me - if you would prefer the tab added back so the choice can come earlier, I am not particular about it here. I think your argument makes sense.

```shell
# Your standard region that you host AWS resources in
export REGION="$AWS_REGION"

# The Camunda 8 Helm Chart version
export CAMUNDA_HELM_CHART_VERSION="11.0.0"
```

<Tabs groupId="env">

>   <TabItem value="basic" label="Standard" default>

Reviewer 3: just a suggestion to keep it consistent with your other doc where you used `value="standard" label="Standard"`

  
When using Basic authentication (username and password), some following environment variables must be set and contain valid values.

Once you have set the environment variables, you can verify that they are correctly configured by running the following loop:

```bash
# List of required environment variables
required_vars=("DB_HOST" "DB_KEYCLOAK_NAME" "DB_KEYCLOAK_USERNAME" "DB_KEYCLOAK_PASSWORD" "DB_IDENTITY_NAME" "DB_IDENTITY_USERNAME" "DB_IDENTITY_PASSWORD" "DB_WEBMODELER_NAME" "DB_WEBMODELER_USERNAME" "DB_WEBMODELER_PASSWORD" "OPENSEARCH_HOST")

# Loop through each variable and check if it is set and not empty
for var in "${required_vars[@]}"; do
  if [[ -z "${!var}" ]]; then
    echo "Error: $var is not set or is empty"
  else
    echo "$var is set to '${!var}'"
  fi

> done

Reviewer 3: side note, doesn't work with `zsh` but default bash does work.

The following are the required environment variables with some example values:

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/procedure/chart-env.sh
```

<Tabs groupId="env">

  <TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>
  

> When using Basic authentication (username and password), some following environment variables must be set and contain valid values.

Reviewer 3: or maybe some instead of following.
Not entirely sure.

Maybe rephrase to

```
When using Basic authentication (username and password), specific environment variables need to be set with valid values. After setting these variables, you can confirm they are configured correctly by running the following loop:
```

Once you have set the environment variables, you can verify that they are correctly configured by running the following loop:

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/procedure/check-env-variables.sh
```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="irsa" label="IRSA" default>
  
When using IRSA authentication, some following environment variables must be set and contain valid values.

> Once you have set the environment variables, you can verify that they are correctly configured by running the following loop:

Reviewer 3: some suggestion as above for standard.

EOF
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="without" label="Without Domain">

Without a domain, you will need to use [kubectl port-forward to access the Camunda platform](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/generated/kubectl_port-forward/).

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Deploy Camunda 8 via Helm charts

For more configuration options, refer to the [Helm chart documentation](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/camunda/camunda-platform#parameters). Additionally, explore our existing resources on the [Camunda 8 Helm chart](/self-managed/setup/install.md) and [guides](/self-managed/setup/guides/guides.md).

Depending of your installation path, you may use different settings.

> For having easy and reproductable installations, we will use yaml files to configure the chart.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For easy and reproducible installations, we will use yaml files to configure the chart.
```

  # externalDatabase:
  #   ...

  # Remove service account and annotations
  # serviceAccount:
  #   ...

  # Remove extra environment variables for external database driver
  # extraEnvVars:
  #   ...

webModeler:
  # Remove this part

  # restapi:
  #     externalDatabase:
  #         url: jdbc:aws-wrapper:postgresql://${DB_HOST}:5432/${DB_WEBMODELER_NAME}
  #         user: ${DB_WEBMODELER_USERNAME}
  #         existingSecret: webmodeler-postgres-secret
  #         existingSecretPasswordKey: password

identity:
  # Remove this part

  # externalDatabase:
  #     enabled: true
  #     host: ${DB_HOST}
  #     port: 5432
  #     username: ${DB_IDENTITY_USERNAME}
  #     database: ${DB_IDENTITY_NAME}
  #     existingSecret: identity-postgres-secret
  #     existingSecretPasswordKey: password
```

</details>

##### Fill your deployment with actual values

Once you've prepared the `values.yml` file, use the `envsubst` command to substitute the environment variables with their actual values. Run the following command:

```bash
# generate the final values
envsubst < values.yml > generated-values.yml

# print the result
cat generated-values.yml
```

> Starting from **Camunda 8.6**, you need to store various passwords in a Kubernetes secret, which will be consumed by the Helm chart. Below is an example of how to set up the required secret:

Reviewer 3: `8.7` isn't it?
8.6 is just the deprecation message but 8.7 is enforcing.
We're also on the `next` docs, indicating 8.7

You can use `openssl` to generate random secrets and store them in environment variables:

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/procedure/generate-passwords.sh
```

Next, use these environment variables in the `kubectl` command to create the secret.

Note:

> - The values for `postgres-password` and `password` are not required if you are using an external database. If you choose not to use an external database, please provide those values.

Reviewer 3: ```
# Identity Keycloak PostgreSQL.
  postgres-password: <base64-encoded-secret> # used for postgresql admin password
  password: <base64-encoded-secret> # used for postgresql user password
```

very confusing naming ^.

> - The `smtp-password` should be replaced with the appropriate external value.

Reviewer 3: smtp is just required for Web Modeler.
Could be considered optional and if kept, should maybe link to some related documentation. I was quite confused for a second where smtp was suddenly coming from.

Reviewer 3: when you deploy the helm chart, it mentions only Web Modeler.

looking at the code: https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Acamunda%2Fcamunda-platform-helm+smtp-password&type=code

it also only reveals the Modeler.

Reviewer 3: yeah the email connector - https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/email/

> Use Camunda secrets to avoid exposing your sensitive data as plain text. See [managing secrets](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/console/manage-clusters/manage-secrets/).

Reviewer 3: in self-managed that would be via env variables.
I guess the helm chart does not automatically add it but would require a user to set it up accordingly.

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/procedure/create-identity-secret.sh
```

#### 3. Install Camunda 8 using Helm

Now that the `generated-values.yml` is ready, you can install Camunda 8 using Helm. Here's the command:

```bash reference

> https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/procedure/install-chart.sh

Reviewer 3: not sure whether we should suggest SNAPSHOT as default for next but we can.

it would require the following adjustment for the helm chart to be used

```
helm upgrade --install camunda oci://ghcr.io/camunda/helm/camunda-platform --version 0.0.0-snapshot-alpha
```

Reviewer 3: essentially, the version defined a bit above would be `0.0.0-snapshot-alpha` doesn't change ever.

Reviewer 3: `SNAPSHOT` might fail if people are following it ... at least for me it's failing right now :D

Reviewer 3: just saying that it would require some adjustments to as with just `SNAPSHOT` it can't be followed 1:1

2. Use `demo` as both the username and password.
3. Click on "Add Application," select `M2M` as the type, and assign a name like "test."
4. Select the newly created application, go to "Access to APIs" and click on the "Assign permissions" then select "Zeebe API" with "write" permission.
5. Retrieve the `client-id` and `client-secret` values from the application details

<!-- prevent error during compilation!-->
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

```shell
export ZEEBE_CLIENT_ID='client-id' # retrieve the value from the identity page of your created m2m application
export ZEEBE_CLIENT_SECRET='client-secret' # retrieve the value from the identity page of your created m2m application
```

<Tabs groupId="c8-connectivity">
  <TabItem value="rest-api" label="REST API" default>

For a detailed guide on generating and using a token, please conduct the relevant documentation on [authenticating with the REST API](./../../../../../apis-tools/camunda-api-rest/camunda-api-rest-authentication.md?environment=self-managed).

<Tabs groupId="domain">
  <TabItem value="with" label="With Domain" default>

Export the following environment variables:

```shell

> export ZEEBE_ADDRESS=zeebe-rest.$DOMAIN_NAME

Reviewer 3: didn't check 8.6 but at least for 8.7 (SNAPSHOT) the ingress is now combined for the rest endpoint.

```
export ZEEBE_ADDRESS=$DOMAIN_NAME/rest
```

Reviewer 3: same is the case for 8.6

</details>

The important part is assigning the `iam_role_arn` of the previously created `opensearch_role` to an internal role within Amazon OpenSearch Service. For example, `all_access` on the Amazon OpenSearch Service side is a good candidate, or if required, extra roles can be created with more restrictive access.

</summary>
</details>

### Verify connectivity to Camunda 8

First, we need an OAuth client to be able to connect to the Camunda 8 cluster.

**Generating an M2M Token Using Identity:**

You can generate an M2M token by following the steps outlined in the [Identity Getting Started Guide](/self-managed/identity/getting-started/install-identity.md), along with the [Incorporating Applications Documentation](/self-managed/identity/user-guide/additional-features/incorporate-applications.md).
Below is an extract of the necessary instructions:

<Tabs groupId="domain">
  <TabItem value="with" label="With Domain" default>

1. Open Identity in your browser at `https://${DOMAIN_NAME}/identity`. You will be redirected to Keycloak and prompted to log in with a username and password.
2. Use `demo` as both the username and password.

> 3. Click on "Add Application," select `M2M` as the type, and assign a name like "test."

Reviewer: Is Add Application exactly as it is written in the UI, or is it Add application?

<Tabs groupId="values">
  <TabItem value="with-domain-std" label="Standard with Domain" default>

The following makes use of the [combined Ingress setup](/self-managed/setup/guides/ingress-setup.md#combined-ingress-setup) by deploying a single Ingress for all HTTP components and a separate Ingress for the gRPC endpoint.

```hcl reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/helm-values/values-domain.yml
```

:::warning Exposure of the Zeebe Gateway

Publicly exposing the Zeebe Gateway without proper authorization can pose significant security risks. To avoid this, consider disabling the Ingress for the Zeebe Gateway by setting the following values to `false` in your configuration file:

- `zeebeGateway.ingress.grpc.enabled`
- `zeebeGateway.ingress.rest.enabled`

By default, authorization is enabled to ensure secure access to Zeebe. Typically, only internal components need direct access to Zeebe, making it unnecessary to expose the gateway externally.

:::

##### Reference the credentials in secrets

> Before installing the Helm chart, you need to create a Kubernetes secrets to store the Keycloak database authentication credentials and the OpenSearch authentication credentials.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before installing the Helm chart, you need to create Kubernetes secrets to store the Keycloak database authentication credentials and the OpenSearch authentication credentials.
```

identity:
  # Remove this part

  # externalDatabase:
  #     enabled: true
  #     host: ${DB_HOST}
  #     port: 5432
  #     username: ${DB_IDENTITY_USERNAME}
  #     database: ${DB_IDENTITY_NAME}
  #     existingSecret: identity-postgres-secret
  #     existingSecretPasswordKey: password
```

</details>

##### Fill your deployment with actual values

Once you've prepared the `values.yml` file, use the `envsubst` command to substitute the environment variables with their actual values. Run the following command:

```bash
envsubst < values.yml > generated-values.yml
```

This will generate a new file `generated-values.yml` with the environment-specific values.

#### 3. Install Camunda 8 using Helm

Now that the `generated-values.yml` is ready, you can install Camunda 8 using Helm. Here's the command:

```bash
helm upgrade --install \
  camunda camunda-platform \
  --repo https://helm.camunda.io \
  --version $CAMUNDA_HELM_CHART_VERSION \
  --namespace camunda \
  -f generated-values.yml
```

This command:

- Installs (or upgrades) the Camunda platform using the Helm chart.
- Substitutes the appropriate version using the `$CAMUNDA_HELM_CHART_VERSION` environment variable.

> - References the namespace `camunda`, creating it if it doesn't exist.

Reviewer 3: for creating you would require `--create-namespace`

:::

##### Reference the credentials in secrets
#### Reference the credentials in secrets

Before installing the Helm chart, you need to create Kubernetes secrets to store the Keycloak database authentication credentials and the OpenSearch authentication credentials.
Before installing the Helm chart, create Kubernetes secrets to store the Keycloak database authentication credentials and the OpenSearch authentication credentials.

To create the secrets, run the following commands:

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/main/examples/camunda-8.7/procedure/create-external-db-secrets.sh
```

  </TabItem>
</TabItem>

>   <TabItem value="without-domain-std" label="Standard without Domain">

Reviewer 2: I think one of my previous commits should have updated the rename/capitalization of these tabs - this should be resolved, but let me know if anything else needs updating.

```shell
Identity:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-identity 8069:80 --namespace camunda
Operate:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-operate  8071:80 --namespace camunda
Tasklist:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-tasklist 8072:80 --namespace camunda
Optimize:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-optimize 8073:80 --namespace camunda
Connectors:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-connectors 8078:8080 --namespace camunda
```

:::note
Keycloak must be port-forwarded at all times as it is required to authenticate.
:::

```shell

> kubectl port-forward services/camunda-keycloak 8070:80 --namespace camunda

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest keeping it aligned with the helm chart.
Otherwise Helm chart is gonna print x and you will say y.
Both will work but still.

```
If you don't have an ingress controller you can use `kubectl port-forward` to access the deployed web application from outside the cluster:

Identity:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-identity 8080:80
Operate:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-operate  8081:80
Tasklist:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-tasklist 8082:80

If you want to use different ports for the services, please adjust the related configs in the values file since these ports are used as redirect URLs for Keycloak.

Authentication via Identity/Keycloak is enabled. To login into one of the services please port-forward to Keycloak
as well, otherwise, a login will not be possible. Make sure you use `18080` as a port.

> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-keycloak 18080:80
```

Cluster endpoint=http://localhost:26500
Client ID='client-id' # retrieve the value from the identity page of your created m2m application
Client Secret='client-secret' # retrieve the value from the identity page of your created m2m application
OAuth Token URL=http://localhost:8070/auth/realms/camunda-platform/protocol/openid-connect/token
Audience=zeebe-api # the default for Camunda 8 Self-Managed
```

If you want to access the other services and their UI, you can port-forward those as well:

```shell
Identity:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-identity 8069:80 --namespace camunda
Operate:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-operate  8071:80 --namespace camunda
Tasklist:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-tasklist 8072:80 --namespace camunda
Optimize:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-optimize 8073:80 --namespace camunda
Connectors:
> kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-connectors 8078:8080 --namespace camunda
```

:::note
Keycloak must be port-forwarded at all times as it is required to authenticate.
:::

```shell

> kubectl port-forward services/camunda-keycloak 8070:80 --namespace camunda

Reviewer 3: same as mentioned above, would keep the ports aligned with the Helm chart output

> kubectl port-forward services/camunda-keycloak 8070:80 --namespace camunda

Reviewer 3: not sure whether this is intended for only the `without domain` part or not.
It's visible for both `with` and `without` `domain`.
